\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename global.info
@settitle GLOBAL source code tag system
@comment %**end of header

@include version.texi

@c Define new index for options.
@defcodeindex op
@syncodeindex op cp

@ifinfo
@dircategory Miscellaneous
@direntry
* GLOBAL: (global).             The GNU GLOBAL source code tag system.
@end direntry
@end ifinfo

@ifinfo
This file documents the @file{GLOBAL} source code tag system.

Copyright (c) 2000, 2001 Tama Communications Corporation. All rights reserved.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts,
and with no Back-Cover Texts.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU
Free Documentation License".
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title GLOBAL source code tag system
@subtitle Edition @value{EDITION}, for GLOBAL version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle @value{UPDATED}
@author by Shigio Yamaguchi
@c copyright page
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 2000, 2001 Tama Communications Corporation.
@sp 2
This is the first edition of the GNU GLOBAL documentation,@*
and is consistent with @value{VERSION}.@*
@sp 2
Published by Tama Communications Corporation @*
Tama-shi, Tokyo, Japan.@*

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts,
and with no Back-Cover Texts.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU
Free Documentation License".

@end titlepage

@ifinfo
@node Top
@top GLOBAL source code tag system

This manual documents version @value{VERSION} of the GLOBAL source code tag system.

@menu
* Introduction::                        Overview of the tools.
* Global::                              Command line GLOBAL.
* GloBash::                             Global facility for Bash.
* Nvi editor::                          Extended nvi using GLOBAL.
* Elvis editor::                        Elvis using GLOBAL.
* Vim editor::                          Vim using GLOBAL.
* Emacs editor::                        Extended emacs using GLOBAL.
* Web browser::                         Hypertext generator.
* Other topics::                        Other topics.
* GNU Free Documentation License::	GNU Free Documentation License.
* Index::                               Option index.
@end menu
@end ifinfo

@c ***************************************************************************
@c Introduction
@c ***************************************************************************
@node Introduction
@chapter Overview of the tools

GNU GLOBAL is a source code tag system that works the same way
across diverse environments.
You can locate a specified function in the source files and move there easily.
It is useful for hacking a large project containing many subdirectories,
many @code{#ifdef} and many @code{main()} functions.

@sp 1

GNU GLOBAL has following features:

@itemize @bullet
@item support C, C++, Yacc and Java.
@item work the same way across diverse environments. Currently, support followings:
	@itemize @minus
	@item Shell command line
	@item Bash shell.
	@item Vi editor clone (nvi, elvis, vim)
	@item Less viewer
	@item Emacs editor (emacs, mule, xemacs)
	@item Web browser
	@end itemize
@item find the locations of a specified object quickly.
@item locate not only object definitions but also object references.
@item allows duplicate objects.
@item locate also path which includes specified pattern.
@item can treat a source tree containing subdirectories as a logical
     scope.  You can get the relative path of objects from anywhere within
     that scope.
@item search not only in a source tree but also in library paths.
@item understand POSIX 1003.2 regular expressions.
@item support external search engine (grep and idutils).
@item generate hypertext of source code.
@item tag files are independent of machine architecture.
@item plugged-in parser is available to treat new language.
@item compact format is available to save disk space.
@item support incremental updating of tag files.
@item support customizing with gtags.conf.
@item generate completion list for completing input method.
@end itemize

@c ***************************************************************************
@c Global
@c ***************************************************************************
@node Global
@chapter Command line GLOBAL

You can use tag facilities from shell command line.
It is a big merit of GLOBAL compared with any other tag system.

@menu
* Preparation::                         Preparation.
* Basic usage::                         Basic usage.
* Applied usage::                       Applied usage.
@end menu

@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Preparation
@section Preparation.

First of all, you must execute gtags(1) at the root of source tree.
For example, if you want to browse vi's source code:

@example

    % cd /usr/src/usr.bin/vi
    % gtags

@end example

Gtags traverse subdirectories and makes four databases at the root of
the source tree.

@example

    % ls G*
    GPATH   GRTAGS  GSYMS   GTAGS

@end example

@itemize @bullet
@item @file{GTAGS}
        database of function definitions
@item @file{GRTAGS}
        database of function references
@item @file{GSYMS}
        database of other symbols
@item @file{GPATH}
        database of path names
@end itemize

@page
@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Basic usage
@section Basic usage.

Consider the following source tree:

@example

    ROOT/           <- @r{the root of source tree (GTAGS,GRTAGS,...)}
    |
    |- DIR1/
    |  |
    |  |- fileA.c   .....   +---------------+
    |  |                    |main()@{        |
    |  |                    |       func1();|
    |  |                    |       func2();|
    |  |                    |@}              |
    |  |                    +---------------+
    |  |
    |  |- fileB.c   .....   +---------------+
    |                       |func1()@{ ... @} |
    |                       +---------------+
    |- DIR2/
       |
       |- fileC.c   .....   +---------------+
                            |#ifdef X       |
                            |func2()@{ i++; @}|
                            |#else          |
                            |func2()@{ i--; @}|
                            |#endif         |
                            |func3()@{       |
                            |       func1();|
                            |@}              |
                            +---------------+

@end example

@itemize @bullet
@item You can get the relative path of your object from anywhere in
the source tree. You need not specify where the tag file is.
Global will locate the tag file by itself.

@example

    % cd ROOT
    % global func1
    DIR1/fileB.c            # @r{func1() is defined in fileB.c}
    % cd DIR1
    % global func1
    fileB.c                 # @r{relative path from DIR1}
    % cd ../DIR2
    % global func1
    ../DIR1/fileB.c         # @r{relative path from DIR2}

@end example

@item The @samp{-r} option locates function references.
@opindex -r

@example

    % global -r func2
    ../DIR1/fileA.c         # @r{func2() is referred from fileA.c}

@end example

@item You can use POSIX regular expressions.

@example

    % cd ROOT
    % global 'func[1-3]'
    DIR1/fileB.c            # @r{func1, func2 and func3 are matched}
    DIR2/fileC.c

@end example

@item The @samp{-x} option shows the details.
It is similar to the @samp{-x} option in ctags(1).
@opindex -x

@example

    % global func2
    DIR2/fileC.c
    % global -x func2
    func2              2 DIR2/fileC.c       func2()@{ i++; @}
    func2              4 DIR2/fileC.c       func2()@{ i--; @}

@end example

@item The @samp{-a} option produces the absolute path name.
@opindex -a

@example

    % global -a func1
    /home/user/ROOT/DIR1/fileB.c

@end example

@item The -s command locates any symbols other than functions.
@opindex -s

@example

    % global -xs X
    X                  1 DIR2/fileC.c #ifdef X

@end example

@item The -g command locates any patterns including symbols.
It is similar to grep(1).
@opindex -g

@example

    % global -xg '#ifdef'
    #ifdef             1 DIR2/fileC.c #ifdef X

@end example

@item The -P command enables you to locate path which includes specified
string.
@opindex -P

@example

    % global -P fileB
    DIR1/fileB.c
    % global -P '1/'
    DIR1/fileA.c
    DIR1/fileB.c
    % global -P '\.c$'
    DIR1/fileA.c
    DIR1/fileB.c
    DIR2/fileC.c

@end example

@item The -f command enables you see the list of functions of specified file.
@opindex -f

@example

    % global -f DIR2/fileC.c
    func2              2 DIR2/fileC.c   func2()@{ i++; @}
    func2              4 DIR2/fileC.c   func2()@{ i--; @}
    func3              6 DIR2/fileC.c   func3()@{

@end example

@end itemize

@page
@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Applied usage
@section Applied usage.

You can make multiple tag files.
For example, you can execute gtags at ROOT/, version1.0/ and version2.0/.

@example


    ROOT/                   <- @r{the root of source tree      (GTAGS,...)}
    |
    |- version1.0/          <- @r{the root of version1.0       (GTAGS,...)}
    |  |
    |  |- file.c    .....   +---------------+
    |                       |func1()@{ i++; @}|
    |                       +---------------+
    |
    |- version2.0/          <- @r{the root of version2.0       (GTAGS,...)}
       |
       |- file.c    .....   +---------------+
                            |func1()@{ i--; @}|
                            +---------------+

@end example

@itemize @bullet
@item When you are in the version1.0 directory, global will only locate functions
that are in version1.0.

@example

    % cd ROOT/version1.0
    % global -x func1
    func1              1 file.c          func1()@{ i++; @}

@end example

@item When you are in the version2.0, global will only locate functions that
are in version2.0.

@example

    % cd ROOT/version2.0
    % global -x func1
    func1              1 file.c          func1()@{ i--; @}

@end example

@item If you are at ROOT/, or you set the @code{GTAGSROOT} environment variable to ROOT,
then global will locate functions in both directories.

@example

    % cd ROOT
    % global -x func1
    func1              1 version1.0/file.c  func1()@{ i++; @}
    func1              1 version2.0/file.c  func1()@{ i--; @}

@end example

@end itemize

There is another usage of @code{GTAGSROOT}.

@itemize @bullet

@item If your source files are on a read-only device, such as CDROM,
then you cannot make databases at the root of the source tree.
In such cases, please do the following:

@example

    % mkdir /var/dbpath
    % cd /cdrom/src                 # @r{the root of source tree}
    % gtags /var/dbpath             # @r{make tag file in /var/dbpath}
    % setenv GTAGSROOT `pwd`
    % setenv GTAGSDBPATH /var/dbpath
    % global func

@end example

@item If you want all references to a function that is not defined in the source
tree to be treated as calls to library functions or system calls, then
you can specify library directories with the @code{GTAGSLIBPATH} environment
variable.

You should execute gtags at each directory of the path.
If @file{GTAGS} is not found in a directory, global ignores that directory.

@example

    % pwd
    /develop/src/mh                         # @r{this is the source tree}
    % gtags
    % ls G*TAGS
    GRTAGS  GTAGS
    % global mhl
    uip/mhlsbr.c                            # @r{mhl() is found}
    % global strlen                         # @r{strlen() is not found}
    % (cd /usr/src/lib; gtags)              # @r{library source}
    % (cd /usr/src/sys; gtags)              # @r{kernel source}
    % setenv GTAGSLIBPATH /usr/src/lib:/usr/src/sys
    % global strlen
    ../../../usr/src/lib/libc/string/strlen.c  # @r{found in library}
    % global access
    ../../../usr/src/sys/kern/vfs_syscalls.c   # @r{found in kernel}

@end example

Of course, the user program does not call kernel functions directly,
but at least it is useful.


@item If you forget a function name, you can use the -c (complete) command.
@opindex -c

@example

    % global -c kmem                # @r{maybe k..k.. kmem..}
    kmem_alloc
    kmem_alloc_pageable
    kmem_alloc_wait
    kmem_free
    kmem_free_wakeup
    kmem_init
    kmem_malloc
    kmem_suballoc                   # @r{This is what I need!}
    % global kmem_suballoc
    ../vm/vm_kern.c

@end example

@item You can use the -c command with tcsh's complete command.

@example

    % set funcs=(`global -c`)
    % complete global 'n/*/$funcs/'
    % global kmem_@kbd{TAB}
    kmem_alloc          kmem_free_wakeup
    kmem_alloc_pageable kmem_init
    kmem_alloc_wait     kmem_malloc
    kmem_free           kmem_suballoc
    % global kmem_s@kbd{TAB}
    % global kmem_suballoc
    ../vm/vm_kern.c

@end example

@item You can edit all files that include a specified function by typing
one command, for example:

@example

    % vi `global func1`     # @r{edit fileB.c}

@end example

@item If you want to browse many files in order, do the following:

@example

    % global -xr fork | awk '@{printf "view +%s %s\n",$2,$3@}'
    view +650 ../dev/aic7xxx/aic7xxx_asm.c
    view +250 ibcs2/ibcs2_misc.c
    view +401 linux/linux_misc.c
    view +310 ../kern/init_main.c
    view +318 ../kern/init_main.c
    view +336 ../kern/init_main.c
    view +351 ../kern/init_main.c
    % !! | sh            # @r{from now on, go to next tag with 'ZZ'.}

@end example

@end itemize

@c ***************************************************************************
@c GloBash
@c ***************************************************************************
@node GloBash
@chapter Global facility for Bash

Special support for bash is available.

@menu
* Features(globash)::			Features.
* Preparation(globash)::		Preparation.
* Basic usage(globash)::		Basic usage.
* Applied usage(globash)::		Applied usage.
@end menu

@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Features(globash)
@section Features.

@itemize @bullet
@item
Vi-like tag stack is available.
@item
Editor or viewer is automatically invoked.
@item
Tag name completion is available.
@item
Tag mark facility is available.
@item
Yor can manage directory list by cookie facility.
@end itemize

@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Preparation(globash)
@section Preparation.

First, do the preparation of global. (Please see @xref{Preparation}.).
And you can invoke bash(1) with ---rcfile option.
@example

    % bash --rcfile globash.rc

@end example

You will see a prompt like this:
@example

    [/usr/src/sys]/kern _

@end example

This prompt means that the current directory is '/usr/src/sys/kern' and
the root of the source tree is '/usr/src/sys'.
Tag and marker are valid only in a project.

When you get out of the project, globash warns like:
@example

    [/usr/src/sys] cd ..
    You are going to get out of current project.
    Tag stack and marker will be removed. Sure? ([y]/n)_

@end example

If you answer 'y' and @kbd{RET}
or just @kbd{RET} in above example then tag stack and marker will be removed.

If you need help then please type 'ghelp'.

@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Basic usage(globash)
@section Basic usage.

@itemize @bullet
@item Almost global(1)'s command character is available as a command.
@example

    [/usr/src/sys] x fork               <- @r{(global -x fork)}
    >    1  fork              94 kern/kern_fork.c fork(p, uap)
    [/usr/src/sys] r                    <- @r{(global -xr fork)}
    >    1  fork              85 alpha/linux/linux_machdep.c
         2  fork             184 i386/linux/linux_machdep.c
    [/usr/src/sys] s lbolt              <- @r{(global -xs lbolt)}
    >    1  lbolt            1210 i386/isa/wd_cd.c     tsleep((cad
         2  lbolt            1211 i386/isa/wd_cd.c     tsleep((cad
         3  lbolt            709 i386/isa/wfd.c     tsleep ((caddr
    ...
    [/usr/src/sys] g                    <- @r{(global -xg lbolt)}
    >    1  lbolt            1210 i386/isa/wd_cd.c     tsleep((cad
    ...
    [/usr/src/sys] P init               <- @r{(global -xP init)}
    >    1  path    1 dev/hea/eni_init.c 
         2  path    1 dev/hfa/fore_init.c 
         3  path    1 i386/i386/initcpu.c 
         4  path    1 kern/init_main.c 
         5  path    1 kern/init_sysent.c 
         6  path    1 kern/vfs_init.c 
         7  path    1 vm/vm_init.c 
    [/usr/src/sys] _

@end example

If no tag name is specified then it is assumed the latest tag name.

@item You can select a tag by show command.
@example

    [/usr/src/sys] x main
    >    1  main              70 alpha/alpha/gensetdefs.c main(in
         2  main             1500 alpha/alpha/ieee_float.c main(i
         3  main             227 boot/alpha/boot1/boot1.c main()
    ....
    [/usr/src/sys] show 3
    (Load editor and show boot/alpha/boot1/boot1.c at line 227.)

@end example

The default editor is vi(1) but you can specify it statically by @code{EDITOR}
environment variable or temporarily by option.

@example

    [/usr/src/sys] show -e 3
    (Load emacs and show boot/alpha/boot1/boot1.c at line 227.)
    [/usr/src/sys] show -l 3
    (Load less and show boot/alpha/boot1/boot1.c at line 227.)

@end example

@item You can use vi-like tag stack. You can return previous tag list by
pop command.
@example

    [/usr/src/sys] x main
    >    1  main              70 alpha/alpha/gensetdefs.c main(in
         2  main             1500 alpha/alpha/ieee_float.c main(i
         3  main             227 boot/alpha/boot1/boot1.c main()
    ....
    [/usr/src/sys] show 3
    (Load editor and show boot/alpha/boot1/boot1.c at line 227.)
    [/usr/src/sys] x fork          <- @r{push new tag on tag stack.}
    >    1  fork              94 kern/kern_fork.c fork(p, uap)
    [/usr/src/sys] pop             <- @r{pop tag stack.}
    [/usr/src/sys] show
    (Load editor and show boot/alpha/boot1/boot1.c at line 227.)

@end example

@end itemize
@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Applied usage(globash)
@section Applied usage.

@itemize @bullet
@item You can memory tags using 'mark' command.
@example

    [/usr/src/sys] x fork
    >    1  fork              94 kern/kern_fork.c fork(p, uap)
    [/usr/src/sys] mark
    [/usr/src/sys] x main
    >    1  main              70 alpha/alpha/gensetdefs.c main(in
         2  main             1500 alpha/alpha/ieee_float.c main(i
         3  main             227 boot/alpha/boot1/boot1.c main()
    ....
    [/usr/src/sys] mark -l              <- @r{show marker list.}
         1  fork              94 kern/kern_fork.c fork(p, uap)
    [/usr/src/sys] mark 1               <- @r{select a marker.}
    (Load editor and show kern/kern_fork.c at line 227.)
    [/usr/src/sys] list
    >    1  main              70 alpha/alpha/gensetdefs.c main(in
         2  main             1500 alpha/alpha/ieee_float.c main(i
         3  main             227 boot/alpha/boot1/boot1.c main()
    ....
@end example

Marked tags are valid until you get out of current project or quit
current bash session.

@item You can memory directories using 'cookie' command.
@example

    [/usr/src/sys] cookie               <- @r{drop cookie.}
    [/usr/src/sys] cd kern
    [/usr/src/sys]/kern cookie          <- @r{drop cookie again.}
    [/usr/src/sys]/kern cd ../i386
    [/usr/src/sys]/i386 cookie -l       <- @r{show cookie list.}
         1  /usr/src/sys/kern
         2  /usr/src/sys
    [/usr/src/sys]/i386 warp 2          <- @r{warp to selected cookie.}
    [/usr/src/sys] _

@end example

Cookie directories are valid until you delete them.

@end itemize
@c ***************************************************************************
@c Nvi editor
@c ***************************************************************************
@node Nvi editor
@chapter Extended nvi using global

You can use GLOBAL as a tag system of Nvi editor instead of ctags.

@menu
* Features(nvi)::			Features.
* Preparation(nvi)::                    Preparation.
* Basic usage(nvi)::                    Basic usage.
* Applied usage(nvi)::                  Applied usage.
@end menu

@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Features(nvi)
@section Features.

@itemize @bullet
@item
You can use most of GLOBAL's facilities from the editor.
@item
Recognition of the current token and its type.
@item
Extended nvi is completely backward-compatible with the original nvi.
You can use GLOBAL's facilities only in 'gtags mode'.
@end itemize

@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Preparation(nvi)
@section Preparation.

First, do the preparation of global. (Please see @xref{Preparation}.).

Second, to use global from vi, you need to get into @dfn{gtagsmode}.
There are several ways to do this:

@enumerate
@item
Start vi with @samp{-G} option

@example

    % vi -G file.c

@end example

@item
Start vi and execute @code{set gtagsmode}.

@example

    % vi file.c
    ~
    ~
    ~
    :set gtagsmode

@end example

@item
Write the above set command to the @file{.exrc} or @file{.nexrc} and start vi

@example

    $HOME/.exrc
    +----------------------------
    |set gtagsmode

@end example

You must start vi under the source tree described in @xref{Preparation}.
@end enumerate

@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Basic usage(nvi)
@section Basic usage.

@itemize @bullet
@item To go to func1, you can say
@example

    :tag func1

@end example

It seemes the same as original vi, but extended vi use @file{GTAGS}
instead of @file{tags}.

@item To go to the referenced point of func1, add the option @kbd{-r}
@example

    :tag -r func1

@end example

Extended nvi use @file{GRTAGS}.

@item If a number of functions are located, extended vi goes to the first tag.
You can go to next tag by typing @kbd{:tagnext} and back by typing @kbd{:tagprev}.

@example

    Suggested .nexrc:
    set gtagsmode
    map ^N :tagnext^M
    map ^P :tagprev^M

@end example

@item @kbd{CTL-]} command is available.
In gtags mode, if current token is not a function then it is equivalent to
@kbd{:tag -s @var{current token}}.
Otherwise, if you are in the first column of a line,
it is equivalent to @kbd{:tag -r @var{current token}} else it is equivalent
to @kbd{:tag @var{current token}}.

@item You can use the @kbd{-s} option. It locates any symbols other than
functions.
@example

    :tag -s pat

@end example
Extended nvi use @file{GSYMS}.

@item The @kbd{-g}, @kbd{-f} and @kbd{-P} option are also available.
It works like command line. Extended nvi use no index file.
@example

    :tag -g pat

@end example
@item Other tag commands are also available:
@table @code
@item @kbd{CTL-T}
Return to the most recent tag context.
@item @kbd{:tagpop}
Go to the specified tag in the tags stack.
@item @kbd{:tagtop}
Go to the top tag in the tags stack.
@item @kbd{:display tags}
Display the tags stack.
@end table
@end itemize


@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Applied usage(nvi)
@section Applied usage.

@itemize @bullet
@item In large projects that include many main() function like MH, you can start vi like this:
@example

    % vi -G -t main

@end example
You can browse all commands sequentially.

@item When you want to check functions the name of which start with "set" or "get", use:
@example

    % vi -G -t '^[sg]et'

@end example

Of course, the following command is also available:
@example

    :tag ^[sg]et

@end example

@item If your source files are on a read only device like a CD-ROM, please do
the following:
@example

    % mkdir /var/dbpath             # @r{directory for the tag file}
    % cd /cdrom/src                 # @r{the root of the source tree}
    % gtags /var/dbpath             # @r{make tag files in /var/dbpath}
    % setenv GTAGSROOT `pwd`
    % setenv GTAGSDBPATH /var/dbpath
    % vi -G -t main

@end example

@item If you want all references to function that are not defined in the source
        tree to be treated as references to library functions or as system calls,
        do the following:
@example

    % cd /usr/src/lib
    % gtags                         # @r{probably as a root}
    % cd /usr/src/sys
    % gtags
    % setenv GTAGSLIBPATH /usr/src/lib:/usr/src/sys

@end example
@item If you examine vi's source,
@example

    % cd /usr/src/usr.bin/vi
    % gtags
    % vi -G -t main

@end example

You can start from vi and browse the whole unix world as if you were
using hypertext.
@end itemize

@c ***************************************************************************
@c Elvis editor
@c ***************************************************************************
@node Elvis editor
@chapter Elvis using global

Elvis 2.1 has new @code{tagprg} and @code{tagprgonce} variables for
running an external tag search program. You can use them with GLOBAL.

@menu
* Features(elvis)::                     Features.
* Preparation(elvis)::                  Preparation.
* Basic usage(elvis)::                  Basic usage.
* Applied usage(elvis)::                Applied usage.
@end menu

@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Features(elvis)
@section Features.

@itemize @bullet
@item
You can use most of GLOBAL's facilities from the editor.
@item
No source level patch is needed.
@item
Mouse events are supported.
@end itemize

@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Preparation(elvis)
@section Preparation.

First, do the preparation of global. (Please see @xref{Preparation}.).

Second, start elvis and execute @code{set tagprg="global -t $1"} like this.
@opindex -t

@example

    % elvis
    ~
    ~
    ~
    ~
    ~
    ~
    :set tagprg="global -t $1"

@end example

@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Basic usage(elvis)
@section Basic usage.

@itemize @bullet
@item To go to func1, you can say
@example

    :tag func1

@end example

It seemes the same as original elvis, but elvis execute @code{global -t func1}
internally and read it instead of tags file.

@item To go to the referenced point of func1, add @samp{-r} option.
@opindex -r
@example

    :tag -r func1

@end example

Elvis executes command like @code{global -t -r func1} internally.

@item To go to any symbols other than function, try this.
@opindex -s
@example

    :tag -s lbolt

@end example

@item To go to any strings other than symbols, try this.
@opindex -g
@example

    :tag -g Copyright

@end example

@item When using -r, -s or -g, you had better to use browse command.
@example

    :browse -r fork

@end example

It brings a following selection list. You can select tag and go to
the point.

@example

    Browse -r fork (2 matches)
    +----------------+----------------+--------------------
    | TAG NAME       | SOURCE FILE    | SOURCE LINE                   
    +----------------+----------------+--------------------
    |fork            |ux/linux_misc.c | (line 565)                    
    |fork            |ern/init_main.c | (line 191)                    
    +----------------+----------------+--------------------

@end example

@item To get list of functions in a file, use -f command.
@opindex -f
@example

    :browse -f main.c               <- @r{locate functions in main.c}

@end example

@item Other tag commands are also available:

@table @code
@item @kbd{CTL-]}
        go to the definition of current token.
@item @kbd{CTL-T}
        return to the most recent tag context.
@item @kbd{:tag}
        without argument, go to the next tag.
@item @kbd{:pop}
        return to the most recent tag context.
@item @kbd{:stack}
        display the tags stack.
@item @kbd{:stag}
        creates a new window and moves its cursor to the tag's definition point.
@item @kbd{:sbrowse}
        same with 'browse' but show in a new window.
@end table
@end itemize

@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Applied usage(elvis)
@section Applied usage.

@itemize @bullet
@item You can use POSIX regular expressions.
@opindex -g
@example

    :tag ^put_                  <- @r{locate functions start with 'put_'}
    
    :browse -g 'fseek(.*L_SET)' <- @r{locate fseek() using L_SET argument}

@end example

@item You can browse functions list of many files.
@opindex -f
@example

    :browse -f *.c              <- @r{locate functions in *.c}

@end example

@item You can browse project files whose path includs specified pattern.
@opindex -P
@example

    :browse -P /vm/             <- @r{under vm/ directory}
    :browse -P \.h$             <- @r{all include files}
    :browse -P init             <- @r{path including 'init'}

@end example

@item You can use mouse to select tag.
@example

    +----------------+----------------+--------------------
    | TAG NAME       | SOURCE FILE    | SOURCE LINE                   
    +----------------+----------------+--------------------
    |fork            |ux/linux_misc.c | (line 565)                    
    |fork            |ern/init_main.c | (line 191)                    
    +----------------+----------------+--------------------

@end example

Please select tag name with mouse cursor and double click on the left
button and you go to the tag's point.
In source screen, also select function name and double click on the
left button and you can go to the point that the function is defined.
To come back, double click on the right button.
@end itemize

@c ***************************************************************************
@c Vim editor
@c ***************************************************************************
@node Vim editor
@chapter Vim using global

Vim 5.2 or later has @code{grepprg} and @code{grepformat} variables for
running an external grep like search program. You can use them with GLOBAL.

@menu
* Features(vim)::                       Features.
* Preparation(vim)::                    Preparation.
* Basic usage(vim)::                    Basic usage.
* Applied usage(vim)::                  Applied usage.
@end menu

@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Features(vim)
@section Features.

@itemize @bullet
@item
You can use most of GLOBAL's facilities from the editor.
@item
No source level patch is needed.
@item
(But tag stack cannot be available.)
@end itemize

@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Preparation(vim)
@section Preparation.

First, do the preparation of global. (Please see @xref{Preparation}.).

Second, write the following set command to the @file{.vimrc} and start vim.

@example

    $HOME/.vimrc
    +----------------------------
    |set grepprg=global\ -t
    |set grepformat=%m\@kbd{TAB}%f\@kbd{TAB}%l

    TAB means @kbd{CTL-I}

@end example
@opindex -t

@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Basic usage(vim)
@section Basic usage.

@itemize @bullet
@item To go to func1, you can say
@example

    :grep func1

@end example

Vim execute @code{global -t func1}, parse the output and list located
objects. You can go to the first entry with @kbd{RET}.

@item To go to the referenced point of func1, add @samp{-r} option.
@opindex -r
@example

    :grep -r func1

@end example

vim executes command like @code{global -t -r func1} internally.

@item To go to any symbols other than function, try this.
@opindex -s
@example

    :grep -s lbolt

@end example

@item To go to any strings other than symbols, try this.
@opindex -g
@example

    :grep -g Copyright

@end example

If many objects are located, vim list all of the them.

@example

main    /usr/src/sys/i386/linux/linux_genassym.c        14
main    /usr/src/sys/kern/init_main.c   183
main    /usr/src/sys/pc98/boot/netboot/main.c   37
main    /usr/src/sys/pc98/boot/netboot/makerom.c        14

Hit ENTER or type command to continue

@end example

You can go to any entry with @kbd{cc}n command.

@item To get list of functions in a file, use -f command.
@opindex -f
@example

    :grep -f main.c               <- @r{locate functions in main.c}

@end example

@item Other grep related commands are also available:

@table @code
@item @kbd{:cn}
        go to the next entry.
@item @kbd{:cp}
        go to the previous entry.
@item @kbd{:ccN}
        go to the N'th entry.
@item @kbd{:cl}
        list all entries.
@end table
@end itemize

@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Applied usage(vim)
@section Applied usage.

@itemize @bullet
@item You can use POSIX regular expressions.
@opindex -g
@example

    :grep ^put_                  <- @r{locate functions start with 'put_'}
    
    :grep -g 'fseek(.*L_SET)' <- @r{locate fseek() using L_SET argument}

@end example

@item You can browse functions list of many files.
@opindex -f
@example

    :grep -f *.c              <- @r{locate functions in *.c}

@end example

@item You can browse project files whose path includs specified pattern.
@opindex -P
@example

    :grep -P /vm/             <- @r{under vm/ directory}
    :grep -P \.h$             <- @r{all include files}
    :grep -P init             <- @r{path including 'init'}

@end example

@end itemize

@c ***************************************************************************
@c Emacs editor
@c ***************************************************************************
@node Emacs editor
@chapter Extended emacs using global

You can use GLOBAL as a tag system of Emacs editor instead of etags.

@menu
* Features(emacs)::			Features.
* Preparation(emacs)::                  Preparation.
* Basic usage(emacs)::                  Basic usage.
* Applied usage(emacs)::                Applied usage.
@end menu

@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Features(emacs)
@section Features.

@itemize @bullet
@item
You can use most of GLOBAL's facilities from the editor.
@item
More intelligent recognition of the current token and its type.
@item
Tag completion is available for input tag name.
@item
Mouse events are supported.
@end itemize

@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Preparation(emacs)
@section Preparation.

First, do the preparation of global. (Please see @xref{Preparation}.).

Second, to use global from emacs, you need to load the @file{gtags.el}
and execute gtags-mode function in it.

@enumerate
@item Write the autoload function to the @file{$HOME/.emacs}, start emacs
       and execute the gtags-mode function.

@example

    $HOME/.emacs
    +------------------------------------------------------
    |(autoload 'gtags-mode "gtags" "" t)
    
    % emacs
    
    |
    |J_:-----Mule: *scratch*       (Lisp Interaction)--L16--All----
    |M-x gtags-mode[RET]
    +------------------------------------------------------

@end example

If you want to get into gtags-mode on c-mode then you can append
followings into the @file{$HOME/.emacs}.
@example

      (setq c-mode-hook
          '(lambda ()
              (gtags-mode 1)
      ))

@end example
    
@item Specify the root directory of the source tree using
@code{gtags-visit-rootdir}.
If you have tag files in /usr/src/sys then please do like this:
@example

    Visit root directory: /usr/src/sys

@end example
@end enumerate


@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Basic usage(emacs)
@section Basic usage.

@itemize @bullet
@item To go to func1, invoke @code{gtags-find-tag}
and you can see a prompt in mini-buffer. Then input the tag name.
@example

    Find tag: func1			<- @r{'Find tag: ' is a prompt}

@end example
@item To go to a point that references func1, invoke @code{gtags-find-rtag}.

@example

    Find tag (reference): func1

@end example

@item Tag name completion is available.
     You need to execute @code{gtags-make-complete-list} command before it.
@example

    Find tag: fu@kbd{TAB}
    
    Find tag: func1                     <- @r{'nc1' is appended by emacs}

@end example

@item If a number of functions are located, emacs goes into @dfn{GTAGS SELECT MODE}
     like this:
@example

    +-------------------------------------------------------------
    |main             347 i386/isa/ultra14f.c main()
    |main             128 kern/init_main.c   main(framep)
    |main             104 netiso/clnp_debug.c main()
    |main             164 netiso/xebec/main.c main(argc, argv)
    |
    |
    |
    |
    |
    |J_:--%*-Mule: *scratch*       (Gtags Select)--L1--All----
    |[GTAGS SELECT MODE] 4 lines
    +-------------------------------------------------------------

@end example

You can select a tag line by using any emacs command and pressing @kbd{RET},
and you can go to the tag's point. When you want to go to the next or
the previous tag, you can return to 'GTAGS SELECT MODE' with @code{gtags-pop-stack}
and reselect.

@item @code{gtags-find-tag-from-here} command is available.

If current token is a definition, it is equivalent to
@kbd{Find tag (reference): @var{current token}RET},
otherwise it is equivalent to @kbd{Find tag: @var{current token}RET}.
(GLOBAL decides this intelligentlly, but may sometimes misunderstand.)

@item To go to any symbols other than function, try @code{gtags-find-symbol}.
@example

    Find symbol: lbolt		<- @r{'Find symbol:' is a prompt}

@end example
@item To go to any strings other than symbols, try @code{gtags-find-with-grep}.
@example

    Find pattern: Copyright

@end example
@end itemize

@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Applied usage(emacs)
@section Applied usage.

@itemize @bullet
@item You can use POSIX regular expressions.

@example

    Find tag: ^put_                 <- @r{locate tags start with 'put_'}

@end example

@item If your source files are on a read-only device like a CDROM, please do
     the following:
@example

    % mkdir /var/dbpath             # @r{directory for the tag file}
    % cd /cdrom/src                 # @r{the root of the source tree}
    % gtags /var/dbpath             # @r{make tag files in /var/dbpath}
    % setenv GTAGSROOT `pwd`
    % setenv GTAGSDBPATH /var/dbpath
    % emacs -f gtags-mode

@end example

@item If you want all references to functions that are not defined in the
     source tree to be treated as references to library functions or
     as system calls, do the following:
 
@example

    % cd /usr/src/lib
    % gtags                         <- @r{probably as a root}
    % cd /usr/src/sys
    % gtags
    % setenv GTAGSLIBPATH /usr/src/lib:/usr/src/sys
    % emacs -f gtags-mode

@end example

@item Mouse command is avalable.

If you use X version emacs, try the following

Move the mouse cursor to a function name and click the middle button.
You will then go to the function's definition, or to its references,
depending on the context. In 'GTAGS SELECT MODE', move the mouse cursor
to a line and click the center button.

To return to the previous position, click the right button.
@end itemize
@c ***************************************************************************
@c Web browser
@c ***************************************************************************
@node Web browser
@chapter Hypertext generator

You can use GLOBAL's facilities from WWW browser.

@menu
* Features(browser)::                   Features.
* Preparation(browser)::                Preparation.
* Usage(browser)::                      Usage.
@end menu

@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Features(browser)
@section Features.

@itemize @bullet
@item Htags makes hypertext from C, C++, Yacc and Java source files.
@item Once the hypertext is generated, you need nothing other than a WWW browser.
@item You can move the hypertext to anywhere. It is independent of the source code.
@item You can use all of your browser's functions, such as search,
     history, bookmark, save, frames, windows.
@end itemize

@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Preparation(browser)
@section Preparation.

At first, you must ensure that you have a lot of disk space. Hypertext
needs a great amount of disk space. For example, the source code
of FreeBSD kernel needs:

@example

    source code(/usr/src/sys)       14.0MB
    
    GTAGS                            1.5MB
    GRTAGS                           8.0MB
    GSYMS                           12.0MB
    HTML/                           55MB(!!!)
    -------------------------------------------------
    total                           77MB

@end example

Please do the following:

@example

    (at your source directory)
    % gtags                 # @r{make the tag database(GTAGS,GRTAGS,GSYMS)}
    % htags                 # @r{make the hypertext(HTML/)}

@end example

Then you will find an @file{HTML} subdirectory in the current directory.


@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Usage(browser)
@section Usage.

Please start a web browser like this:

@example

    % lynx HTML/index.html

@end example

You will understand the usage by looking at the examples.

You can move the HTML directory to anywhere. It is independent of the
source code.

@c ***************************************************************************
@c Other topics
@c ***************************************************************************
@node Other topics
@chapter Other topics

@menu
* Plugin::                              How to plug in a parser.
* Compact format::                      Compact format.
* Incremental updating::                Incremental updating.
@end menu

@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Plugin
@section How to plug in a parser.

You can write new parser and use as a plugged-in parser.

Copy @file{gtags.conf} to @file{/etc/gtags.conf} or @file{$HOME/.globalrc}.

For example, if you would like to use ctags based on etags (included
by Emacs),

@example

    % cd /@var{emacs source directory}/lib-src
    % make ctags
    # cp ctags /usr/local/bin/ctags-emacs
    % setenv GTAGSLABEL ctags-emacs         # @r{see gtags.conf}
    % gtags
    % ls G*
    GPATH   GTAGS

@end example

Or if you would like to use exuberant ctags (included by Vim editor),

@example

    % cd /@var{vim source directory}/src/ctags
    % cp Makefile.unix Makefile
    % make
    # cp ctags /usr/local/bin/ctags-exuberant
    % setenv GTAGSLABEL ctags-exuberant     # @r{see gtags.conf}
    % gtags
    % ls G*
    GPATH   GTAGS

@end example

@file{GRTAGS} and @file{GSYMS} don't exist, simply because
these parsers don't support the @samp{-r} option and @samp{-s} option like gctags(1) does.
@opindex -r
@opindex -s
All plugged-in parsers must print tag information to standard output
in the same style as @code{ctags -x}, ie.:

@example

    [1]    [2] [3]          [4]
    ----------------------------------------------------------------
    main    20 ./main.c     main(argc, argv)        /* xxx */
    
    [1] tag name
    [2] line number the tag appeared
    [3] path name. It must be equal to argument path name.
    [4] line image

@end example

Otherwise, you can make a suitable wrapper for the plug-in parser.

@page
@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Compact format
@section Compact format.

You can save disk space with the compact format. The compact format
needs source files.

@itemize @bullet
@item To specify the use of the compact format on the command line,
     add the @samp{-c} option:
@opindex -c
@example

    % gtags -c

@end example

@item To specify the use of the compact format in the configuration file:
@example

    +----------------------------
    |...
    |default:\
    |       format=compact:...

@end example

@item If you will publish hypertext generated by htags then use the @samp{-c} option
     of htags too:
@opindex -c
@example

    % htags -c

@end example

With the @samp{-c} option, htags makes gzipped hypertext.
You need to set up an HTTP server so that gzipped files can be read
(see @file{HTML/.htaccess.skel}).

@example

    Example:
    
            Standard        Compact         Compressed rate
    -------------------------------------------------------
    GTAGS    1744896 bytes   720896 bytes   -59%
    GRTAGS  10133504 bytes  1409024 bytes   -86%
    GSYMS   11911168 bytes  9306112 bytes   -22%
    
            Standard        Compact         Compressed rate
    -------------------------------------------------------
    HTML/   56618 kbytes    15219 kbytes    -73%

@end example
@end itemize

@page
@c ***************************************************************************
@node   Incremental updating
@section Incremental updating.

Modifying some source files, you need not remake whole tag files.
Instead, you can use incremental updating facility (@samp{-u} option).
@opindex -u
@example

    % gtags
    % cd kern
    % vi tty.c                              # @r{modify tty.c}
    ...
    :wq
    % global -vu                            # @r{-v means verbose}
    [Sun Dec  6 16:27:47 JST 1998] Gtags started
     Tag found in '/usr/src/sys'.
     Incremental update.
     Updating tags of 'kern/tty.c' ...GTAGS..GRTAGS..GSYMS.. Done.
     Global databases have been modified.
    [Sun Dec  6 16:28:30 JST 1998] Done.
    % global -vu                            # @r{try again}
    [Sun Dec  6 16:28:48 JST 1998] Gtags started
     Tag found in '/usr/src/sys'.
     Incremental update.
     Global databases are up to date.       # @r{do nothing}
    [Sun Dec  6 16:28:52 JST 1998] Done.

@end example

@c ***************************************************************************
@c GNU Free Documentation License
@c ***************************************************************************

@node GNU Free Documentation License
@unnumbered GNU Free Documentation License

@c This file is intended to be included in another file.

@center Version 1.1, March 2000

@display
Copyright (C) 2000  Free Software Foundation, Inc.
    59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA
Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.
@end display

@unnumberedsec Preamble

The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other
written document ``free'' in the sense of freedom: to assure everyone
the effective freedom to copy and redistribute it, with or without
modifying it, either commercially or noncommercially.  Secondarily,
this License preserves for the author and publisher a way to get
credit for their work, while not being considered responsible for
modifications made by others.

This License is a kind of ``copyleft'', which means that derivative
works of the document must themselves be free in the same sense.  It
complements the GNU General Public License, which is a copyleft
license designed for free software.

We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for free
software, because free software needs free documentation: a free
program should come with manuals providing the same freedoms that the
software does.  But this License is not limited to software manuals;
it can be used for any textual work, regardless of subject matter or
whether it is published as a printed book.  We recommend this License
principally for works whose purpose is instruction or reference.

@unnumberedsec APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS

This License applies to any manual or other work that contains a
notice placed by the copyright holder saying it can be distributed
under the terms of this License.  The ``Document'', below, refers to any
such manual or work.  Any member of the public is a licensee, and is
addressed as ``you''.

A ``Modified Version'' of the Document means any work containing the
Document or a portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with
modifications and/or translated into another language.

A ``Secondary Section'' is a named appendix or a front-matter section of
the Document that deals exclusively with the relationship of the
publishers or authors of the Document to the Document's overall subject
(or to related matters) and contains nothing that could fall directly
within that overall subject.  (For example, if the Document is in part a
textbook of mathematics, a Secondary Section may not explain any
mathematics.)  The relationship could be a matter of historical
connection with the subject or with related matters, or of legal,
commercial, philosophical, ethical or political position regarding
them.

The ``Invariant Sections'' are certain Secondary Sections whose titles
are designated, as being those of Invariant Sections, in the notice
that says that the Document is released under this License.

The ``Cover Texts'' are certain short passages of text that are listed,
as Front-Cover Texts or Back-Cover Texts, in the notice that says that
the Document is released under this License.

A ``Transparent'' copy of the Document means a machine-readable copy,
represented in a format whose specification is available to the
general public, whose contents can be viewed and edited directly and
straightforwardly with generic text editors or (for images composed of
pixels) generic paint programs or (for drawings) some widely available
drawing editor, and that is suitable for input to text formatters or
for automatic translation to a variety of formats suitable for input
to text formatters.  A copy made in an otherwise Transparent file
format whose markup has been designed to thwart or discourage
subsequent modification by readers is not Transparent.  A copy that is
not ``Transparent" is called "Opaque''.

Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain
ASCII without markup, Texinfo input format, LaTeX input format, SGML
or XML using a publicly available DTD, and standard-conforming simple
HTML designed for human modification.  Opaque formats include
PostScript, PDF, proprietary formats that can be read and edited only
by proprietary word processors, SGML or XML for which the DTD and/or
processing tools are not generally available, and the
machine-generated HTML produced by some word processors for output
purposes only.

The ``Title Page'' means, for a printed book, the title page itself,
plus such following pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the material
this License requires to appear in the title page.  For works in
formats which do not have any title page as such, ``Title Page'' means
the text near the most prominent appearance of the work's title,
preceding the beginning of the body of the text.

@unnumberedsec VERBATIM COPYING

You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either
commercially or noncommercially, provided that this License, the
copyright notices, and the license notice saying this License applies
to the Document are reproduced in all copies, and that you add no other
conditions whatsoever to those of this License.  You may not use
technical measures to obstruct or control the reading or further
copying of the copies you make or distribute.  However, you may accept
compensation in exchange for copies.  If you distribute a large enough
number of copies you must also follow the conditions in section 3.

You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above, and
you may publicly display copies.

@unnumberedsec COPYING IN QUANTITY

If you publish printed copies of the Document numbering more than 100,
and the Document's license notice requires Cover Texts, you must enclose
the copies in covers that carry, clearly and legibly, all these Cover
Texts: Front-Cover Texts on the front cover, and Back-Cover Texts on
the back cover.  Both covers must also clearly and legibly identify
you as the publisher of these copies.  The front cover must present
the full title with all words of the title equally prominent and
visible.  You may add other material on the covers in addition.
Copying with changes limited to the covers, as long as they preserve
the title of the Document and satisfy these conditions, can be treated
as verbatim copying in other respects.

If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit
legibly, you should put the first ones listed (as many as fit
reasonably) on the actual cover, and continue the rest onto adjacent
pages.

If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document numbering
more than 100, you must either include a machine-readable Transparent
copy along with each Opaque copy, or state in or with each Opaque copy
a publicly-accessible computer-network location containing a complete
Transparent copy of the Document, free of added material, which the
general network-using public has access to download anonymously at no
charge using public-standard network protocols.  If you use the latter
option, you must take reasonably prudent steps, when you begin
distribution of Opaque copies in quantity, to ensure that this
Transparent copy will remain thus accessible at the stated location
until at least one year after the last time you distribute an Opaque
copy (directly or through your agents or retailers) of that edition to
the public.

It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of the
Document well before redistributing any large number of copies, to give
them a chance to provide you with an updated version of the Document.

@unnumberedsec MODIFICATIONS

You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document under
the conditions of sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you release
the Modified Version under precisely this License, with the Modified
Version filling the role of the Document, thus licensing distribution
and modification of the Modified Version to whoever possesses a copy
of it.  In addition, you must do these things in the Modified Version:

@enumerate A
@item
Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title distinct
from that of the Document, and from those of previous versions
(which should, if there were any, be listed in the History section
of the Document).  You may use the same title as a previous version
if the original publisher of that version gives permission.

@item 
 List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or entities
responsible for authorship of the modifications in the Modified
Version, together with at least five of the principal authors of the
Document (all of its principal authors, if it has less than five).

@item 
State on the Title page the name of the publisher of the
Modified Version, as the publisher.

@item 
 Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.

@item 
Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications
adjacent to the other copyright notices.

@item 
Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license notice
giving the public permission to use the Modified Version under the
terms of this License, in the form shown in the Addendum below.

@item 
Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant Sections
and required Cover Texts given in the Document's license notice.

@item 
Include an unaltered copy of this License.

@item 
Preserve the section entitled ``History'', and its title, and add to
it an item stating at least the title, year, new authors, and
publisher of the Modified Version as given on the Title Page.  If
there is no section entitled ``History'' in the Document, create one
stating the title, year, authors, and publisher of the Document as
given on its Title Page, then add an item describing the Modified
Version as stated in the previous sentence.

@item 
Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document for
public access to a Transparent copy of the Document, and likewise
the network locations given in the Document for previous versions
it was based on.  These may be placed in the ``History'' section.
You may omit a network location for a work that was published at
least four years before the Document itself, or if the original
publisher of the version it refers to gives permission.

@item 
In any section entitled ``Acknowledgements" or "Dedications'',
preserve the section's title, and preserve in the section all the
substance and tone of each of the contributor acknowledgements
and/or dedications given therein.

@item 
Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document,
unaltered in their text and in their titles.  Section numbers
or the equivalent are not considered part of the section titles.

@item 
Delete any section entitled ``Endorsements''.  Such a section
may not be included in the Modified Version.

@item 
Do not retitle any existing section as ``Endorsements''
or to conflict in title with any Invariant Section.
@end enumerate

If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or
appendices that qualify as Secondary Sections and contain no material
copied from the Document, you may at your option designate some or all
of these sections as invariant.  To do this, add their titles to the
list of Invariant Sections in the Modified Version's license notice.
These titles must be distinct from any other section titles.

You may add a section entitled ``Endorsements'', provided it contains
nothing but endorsements of your Modified Version by various
parties--for example, statements of peer review or that the text has
been approved by an organization as the authoritative definition of a
standard.

You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text, and a
passage of up to 25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of the list
of Cover Texts in the Modified Version.  Only one passage of
Front-Cover Text and one of Back-Cover Text may be added by (or
through arrangements made by) any one entity.  If the Document already
includes a cover text for the same cover, previously added by you or
by arrangement made by the same entity you are acting on behalf of,
you may not add another; but you may replace the old one, on explicit
permission from the previous publisher that added the old one.

The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this License
give permission to use their names for publicity for or to assert or
imply endorsement of any Modified Version.

@unnumberedsec COMBINING DOCUMENTS

You may combine the Document with other documents released under this
License, under the terms defined in section 4 above for modified
versions, provided that you include in the combination all of the
Invariant Sections of all of the original documents, unmodified, and
list them all as Invariant Sections of your combined work in its
license notice.

The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and
multiple identical Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single
copy.  If there are multiple Invariant Sections with the same name but
different contents, make the title of each such section unique by
adding at the end of it, in parentheses, the name of the original
author or publisher of that section if known, or else a unique number.
Make the same adjustment to the section titles in the list of
Invariant Sections in the license notice of the combined work.

In the combination, you must combine any sections entitled ``History''
in the various original documents, forming one section entitled
``History"; likewise combine any sections entitled "Acknowledgements'',
and any sections entitled ``Dedications''.  You must delete all sections
entitled ``Endorsements.''

@unnumberedsec COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS

You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other documents
released under this License, and replace the individual copies of this
License in the various documents with a single copy that is included in
the collection, provided that you follow the rules of this License for
verbatim copying of each of the documents in all other respects.

You may extract a single document from such a collection, and distribute
it individually under this License, provided you insert a copy of this
License into the extracted document, and follow this License in all
other respects regarding verbatim copying of that document.

@unnumberedsec AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS

A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other separate
and independent documents or works, in or on a volume of a storage or
distribution medium, does not as a whole count as a Modified Version
of the Document, provided no compilation copyright is claimed for the
compilation.  Such a compilation is called an ``aggregate'', and this
License does not apply to the other self-contained works thus compiled
with the Document, on account of their being thus compiled, if they
are not themselves derivative works of the Document.

If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these
copies of the Document, then if the Document is less than one quarter
of the entire aggregate, the Document's Cover Texts may be placed on
covers that surround only the Document within the aggregate.
Otherwise they must appear on covers around the whole aggregate.

@unnumberedsec TRANSLATION

Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may
distribute translations of the Document under the terms of section 4.
Replacing Invariant Sections with translations requires special
permission from their copyright holders, but you may include
translations of some or all Invariant Sections in addition to the
original versions of these Invariant Sections.  You may include a
translation of this License provided that you also include the
original English version of this License.  In case of a disagreement
between the translation and the original English version of this
License, the original English version will prevail.

@unnumberedsec TERMINATION

You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document except
as expressly provided for under this License.  Any other attempt to
copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Document is void, and will
automatically terminate your rights under this License.  However,
parties who have received copies, or rights, from you under this
License will not have their licenses terminated so long as such
parties remain in full compliance.

@unnumberedsec FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE

The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions
of the GNU Free Documentation License from time to time.  Such new
versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may
differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.  See
http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/.

Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version number.
If the Document specifies that a particular numbered version of this
License ``or any later version'' applies to it, you have the option of
following the terms and conditions either of that specified version or
of any later version that has been published (not as a draft) by the
Free Software Foundation.  If the Document does not specify a version
number of this License, you may choose any version ever published (not
as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation.



@unnumberedsec ADDENDUM: How to use this License for your documents

To use this License in a document you have written, include a copy of
the License in the document and put the following copyright and
license notices just after the title page:

@display
Copyright (c)  YEAR  YOUR NAME.
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with the Invariant Sections being LIST THEIR TITLES, with the
Front-Cover Texts being LIST, and with the Back-Cover Texts being LIST.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU
Free Documentation License".
@end display

If you have no Invariant Sections, write ``with no Invariant Sections''
instead of saying which ones are invariant.  If you have no
Front-Cover Texts, write ``no Front-Cover Texts'' instead of
``Front-Cover Texts being LIST''; likewise for Back-Cover Texts.

If your document contains nontrivial examples of program code, we
recommend releasing these examples in parallel under your choice of
free software license, such as the GNU General Public License,
to permit their use in free software.

@node Index
@unnumbered Option Index
@printindex cp
@contents
@bye
